HTC Desire 500 review

The HTC Desire 

500 is the Taiwanese handset giant's attempt to address the lower 

mid-range smartphone segment. The phone tries to pack in some major 

features of its elder siblings, the HTC Desire 600 and the HTC One, 

in a budget friendly compact plastic shell and relatively inferior 

hardware specifications.Also giving it dual-SIM 

capability, HTC takes on the likes of Micromax, Karbonn and Lava (and 

even Sony) with the Desire 500, luring price sensitive users who want 

to use two connections on their smartphones.Is the Desire 

500 a good buy over smartphones from other device makers in the same 

price range? We try to answer this in our review.Build/ DesignCutting the crowd of 5-inch plus 

phablets, the HTC Desire 500 is a rather compact smartphone featuring 

a 4.3-inch display. The phone fits easily in one's hands and pockets, 

and is light in weight. It's made of good quality plastic and feels 

nice to hold.The Desire 500 is available in two colour 

variants, Black and White. We got the latter as our review unit, with 

a touch of red on the edges and the back.The phone's construction 

reminded us of the Nokia Lumia 620, featuring a back panel cover that 

wraps around the front panel, with the former housing the phone's 

buttons.The front of the Desire 500 is dominated by its 

4.3-inch WVGA display surrounded by a Black bezel. The phone doesn't 

sport a front speaker, unlike the HTC One, One mini and the Desire 

600, but rather, its earpiece, which is placed above the display, 

looks like a front speaker.  The two capacitive touch buttons 

for Back and Home sit below the display with the HTC branding in 

between, while the 1.6-megapixel front camera is located above the 

display, along with a notification LED.The side edge of 

the Desire 500 features a red coloured frame that runs across the 

entire phone but ends strategically at the top right edge with the 

two ends camouflaging the volume up and down buttons. Even the power 

/ screen lock key is red in colour and sits at the top along with the 

3.5mm headset jack. The keys don't really offer a good tactile 

feedback.The Micro-USB port sits at the bottom of the 

Desire 500. There are no keys or ports on the left-hand side. The 

plastic cover sports a glossy finish at the back sporting some red 

coloured HTC branding and an 8-megapixel camera lens and LED flash 

(also featuring some red accents). The speaker grill is located 

towards the bottom.Interestingly, the buttons are 

integrated with the Desire 500's cover, which means that it's hard to 

use them if the cover has been removed - hardly a typical use case, 

but worth pointing out nonetheless. The back of the 

Desire 500 is prone to scratches and smudges though the glossy finish 

helps in concealing them. The phone doesn't feel very premium due to 

the glossy plastics but the quality of plastics used is better 

compared to Samsung phones. Removing the Desire 500's 

cover looks tricky at first but can be done by exerting some force on 

the back cover and pulling the cover from the bottom. The 

two micro-SIM card slots and the microSD card slot are located above 

the battery compartment. All of these can be accessed without the 

need to remove the battery. However, you'll need to restart the phone 

if you insert a new SIM card.Display The HTC 

Desire 500 features a 4.3-inch TFT panel WVGA display with a 

resolution of 480x800 pixels and pixel density of 216ppi. We were a 

bit disappointed that HTC has not equipped the phone with at least a 

720p display, especially considering the phone's price.The display still looks better than the one seen on the Samsung 

Galaxy Grand but this has to do with the Desire 500's display not 

being very large, resulting in better pixel density. The 

Desire 500 display's viewing angles were good, though. The screen is 

not very reflective and sunlight visibility was decent. Colours 

appeared to be vibrant and blacks looked deep.CameraThe HTC Desire 500 sports an 8-megapixel rear 

camera lens which comes with auto-focus and an LED flash. The phone 

also includes a dedicated HTC ImageChip for quick processing of 

images and has Smart Flash, that offers a five-level flash that is 

automatically set based on the distance to the subject. As with other 

Android devices from the company, HTC integrates its own Camera app, 

that allows users to select different scene settings (among Normal, 

Landscape, Portrait, Backlight, Night, Text and Macro) for still 

captures; switch between HDR, Sweep Panorama and Anti-shake modes, 

and choose the slow motion video mode.  It also allows users to 

put a self timer (ranging from 2 to 10 seconds), select the 

resolution, video quality, review duration, image adjustments (for 

exposure, contrast, saturation and sharpness), ISO and White Balance 

settings. One can also choose to disable Continuous Shooting or 

restrict it to 20 frames.In addition to the 

above, there are other options related to face and smile detection, 

geo-tagging, shutter sound and a grid interface. Interestingly, the 

camera app also offers lenses for adding effects like Sepia, 

Negative, Vintage, amongst others, even before one clicks a picture. 

Just like the HTC Butterfly, and HTC One, the Desire 500 also has a 

sightseeing mode, which simply means that if you lock the phone in 

the camera app, you'd find it open when you press the same key again 

(no need to unlock the screen.)The HTC Desire 500 doesn't 

include the HTC Zoe mode seen on the HTC One. The Desire 

500 takes decent quality images in daylight and the amount of detail 

captured by the camera lens was satisfactory. Colour reproduction was 

pretty accurate. Just like with the Desire 600, we did 

face issues trying to focus, especially while taking close up shots 

of objects, and noticed a very minor lag between pressing the shutter 

and the phone actually capturing an image, but the quality of photos 

compensated for these shortcomings.Images taken indoors 

in artificial light were a bit soft and even grainy to a certain 

extent.The Desire 500's BSI sensor does help in capturing 

images in low-light situations, however, the images shot in low-light 

with the night mode on had a high amount of noise similar to pictures 

shot with the Desire 600. The camera can record video up 

to 720p resolution and we found the quality of the videos captured by 

the Desire 500 to be good.The Desire 500's 1.6-megapixel 

camera also takes decent images and is suitable for self clicks and 

video chats.Software/ InterfaceThe HTC 

Desire 500 runs Android 4.1.2 Jelly Bean, which is not the latest 

version of the OS considering that Google has released Android 4.3, 

and will soon announce Android 4.4 KitKat. As with other recent HTC 

Android phones, the phone comes with Sense 5, HTC's own UI layer that 

runs on top of Android. The new version of Sense was first seen on 

the HTC One. While some people prefer stock Android over 

any kind of skinning, we feel that the Sense is one of the better 

skinning solutions. Skinning in Sense 5 is minimal compared to 

previous versions, and icons have been toned down, and appear 

flat.The highlight of the Sense 5 UI is a home screen 

feed that the company likes to call BlinkFeed. You can select 'topics 

and services' for the BlinkFeed and it will push updates from them on 

the home screen. You can also select categories of interests. It also 

lets you select services such as Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, LinkedIn 

and Plurk, configure your account and receive updates on the Blink 

Feed.Updates are in the form of tiles that can be tapped to offer 

full text or videos. One can also share the update via social 

networks and email.The Desire 500 offers BlinkFeed as the 

default home screen with time and weather information on top but you 

can easily select any other home screen as the default one. One can 

add up to five home screens including BlinkFeed as well as reduce the 

number of home screens to even one, though that screen has to be the 

BlinkFeed screen. The default clock and 

weather information displays have been toned down to a flat 

minimalist white over black design on the Desire 500, though the 

conventional flip clocks and analog clocks are also available as 

widgets. The weather and clock info is also present in the menu/app 

launcher tray.One can navigate the phone through the 

capacitive touch buttons for going to the Home screen and for going 

Back. HTC has got rid of the third 'Menu plus App Switcher' button on 

the Desire 500. The Home button on long press takes you to Google Now 

and on double tap takes you to the app switcher. You can change the 

double-tap speed of the Home button through settings.We 

did miss the presence of the third button on the Desire 500, 

especially since there's no button in the middle on the phone. It 

takes some time getting used to the new arrangement, if you've been 

using any other Android phone for a significant amount of time.HTC has also changed the app switcher UI with a flat app 

preview grid for up to 6 apps replacing the previous 3D UI. Apps can 

be dismissed by pushing preview windows out of the screen.The HTC Desire 500 offers more or less the same software features 

that we've seen on the HTC One. For a detailed look, please read our 

HTC One review.The Desire 500 doesn't include a TV Remote 

app that was present on the HTC One as the phone doesn't come with an 

IR Blaster. It also doesn't offer a Kid mode to enable selective 

access to some apps for kids and the Zoe camera mode unlike the HTC 

One. Since the phone's stuck at Android 4.1, it also 

doesn't feature lock screen widgets. HTC has also not included 

toggles for frequently used controls (Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Sound 

profiles, data and others) in the notifications tray.HTC 

offers customised native apps for Music, Gallery, and Camera, among 

others.We hope HTC releases an Android 4.2 update for the 

phone soon, to plug in the minor gaps in functionality and 

features.Performance/ Battery LifeThe HTC 

Desire 500 is powered by a 1.2GHz Qualcomm Snapdragon 200 quad-core 

processor with 1GB RAM, and an Adreno 203 chip for processing 

graphics. The phone has 4GB of internal storage, out of which only 

1GB is available to the user. Storage is expandable up to 64GB 

through microSD cards.Judging purely by the hardware 

specifications, the Desire 500 is anything but a high-end device. The overall experience of navigation through the Desire 500's 

interface was decent and we did not experience much lag while 

launching apps, playing games or switching between apps. Having said 

that, we noticed that scrolling was not smooth while browsing the 

Play Store and using some apps, including Facebook and Twitter. Also, 

at times going back to the BlinkFeed or Home screen from an app 

caused a slight delay.We were able to play games such as 

Temple Run, Subway Surfers and Asphalt 7 on the Desire 500 without 

any issues.The HTC Desire 500 offers Chrome in addition 

to the default browser. The default browser also allows users to turn 

on Adobe flash for viewing Flash content. It also offers a reader 

mode for reading text heavy web pages. Unfortunately, we 

were not able to play full-HD videos on the Desire 500's native 

player (using a third-party app solves the issue). The sole rear speaker on the phone delivers decent quality 

sound at high volume levels but it gets muffled when the phone lies 

on its back. The phone also supports Beats audio, but only with 

headphones. The quality of sound output was good, overall.Call quality was great and the Desire 500 is able to latch on to 

cellular networks even in weak signal areas.The Desire 

500 offers dual-SIM functionality with support for one 3G (WCDMA) SIM 

and a GSM (non-3G SIM). It offers active standby, which implies that 

if you're on a call on one SIM and get another call on the other one, 

you'll be notified of the call and the calling party will get a 'call 

waiting' indication.The Desire 500 also offers FM radio 

and comes with NFC functionality for transferring content with other 

NFC-enabled phones. It also supports the DLNA protocol for wirelessly 

streaming media from the phone to a compatible TV or computer.The HTC Desire 500 comes with an 1800mAh battery, and in our 

usage, it lasted us a full day. We charged the phone in the morning 

(at around 9 am), and with medium to heavy usage, including 1-1.5 

hours of phone calls, two e-mail accounts with push notifications, 

playing some music, Twitter notifications and WhatsApp chats, the 

phone lasted a good 11-12 hours. It's worth pointing out 

that we had turned off Wi-Fi and auto-brightness, and the Desire 500 

was hooked to a 3G network with the screen brightness at the highest 

level. Altering these settings might help in running the phone for a 

longer duration, depending on your usage pattern. VerdictAt a price of Rs. 21,490, the HTC Desire 500 is 

a good all rounder if you're in the market for a compact Android 

phone that offers modern features and above average performance. 

However, we feel that HTC should have included a screen with a better 

resolution. Even the camera does not take good quality low-light 

shots and lacks support for full-HD video capture.The 

recently launched Sony Xperia C and Micromax Canvas Turbo will surely 

give some competition to the phone in terms of hardware 

specifications. Both offer bigger screens and come almost at the same 

price point. We'd recommend that you wait for our reviews of the two 

new phones. If you can spend a little more, the Nexus 4 

(stocks could be limited) and the Lenovo K900 are good options, as 

well.Overall, the Desire 500 is a good mid-range phone 

marred by a low resolution screen.
HTC Desire 500 in pictures


